Francis: Hello. Welcome to you all
for coming together
to recognize Frank and Kathy.
Grace: No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Not your preaching.
No, You say sentence.
“I preached this wedding
for deaf and blind couple.”
The sentence, not you preaching
Francis: I preached more of a blessing
to a deaf and blind couple
for their wedding.
They were both deaf and blind,
and I had a blessing
on their relationship.
[music plays]
Grace: Your patience level with
your parents is much lower.
The bar is low, so as a kid you're like,
“your voice is weird.”
Like “stop.”
Like, “don't be loud.”
Like, we would go out
and he would try to talk, either
my dad or my mom would talk to us
and they use their voice
and it's like the room is quiet, please.
Like, be quiet.
Francis: I'm not realizing that
my voice is being used.
I can't hear my voice.
I don't know what it sounds like.
It's very bass It's very low.
It's loud.
And so for them, they're embarrassed.
So I do try to like, you know, manage and,
you know, figure out how I can help them
as they help me.
Grace: Growing up interpreting for my dad,
since he is deaf and blind,
I would say it's been a little bit
difficult.
Difficult, more like physically,
I think for both of us,
because you have to
sign with someone that is,
you know, has their hand on top of you
that it can get tiring for both of us
and that it's taxing on
both of our arms to sign.
And sometimes if it's a long meeting
that I'm interpreting for
or if it's a movie that I'm interpreting,
it's really hard to like not be tired.
As someone whose parents are deaf and deaf
and blind is you help them so much,
you kind of, you don't
get to do your own thing sometimes
you're like, “hey, you're going
to the doctor's appointment with me.”
You're like, “great.
I wanted to go do something else.”
Francis: Really, in general, in
just everyday things
I would rather have
someone else interpret.
I don't want to depend on my children.
They have their own life,
their own things that they're doing.
But if they're around, they're nearby,
we're at a family gathering,
then of course, you know,
I'll have them to interpret
if they feel comfortable for me.
Yes, there are ups and downs,
just as any family, any parent to children.
[music plays]
Grace: You have these emotions
attached to your parents.
So if they're saying something, you're like,
“ah, I don't want you to say
something like that.”
And so you have this like
internal like, don't say that.
Whereas when you're interpreting
for a stranger, it's just this
like they're allowed
to say what they want to say
because you don't know any backstory.
So I think kind of
that could be the negative to it,
but then it could also be a positive
because sometimes as a child interpreting
for my dad, I can see other interpreters
and be like, you're not doing him justice.
If they're missing something that he said,
if it's important, I'm going to say,
“Hey, don't forget he said this.”
If they add something in, I'm like,
“ah,” like it doesn't feel so great.
I feel like what he's trying to
express is not getting across.
So as a daughter, I'm like, you're not,
you know, expressing
exactly what he's saying to you.
Francis: There's a lot of misunderstanding
and miscommunication that can happen.
So there's a place where you want
to make sure that you're
understanding each other
because there's so many different styles.
A lot of interpreters
have to make sure that it's clear.
And the same thing with my kids.
[music plays]
Grace: Because my dad can't see
and he can't hear.
his senses are pretty strong.
So one story that he and I
were talking about yesterday
was because I knew he was deaf and blind,
I would take advantage of that.
So I loved watching TV
and I would sneak and watch TV.
And as soon as I heard my dad coming,
I would turn it off and I would go hide.
And he would come over and he's brilliant.
He would put his hand on the TV and feel
if it was hot or warm, and he'd go,
“Grace was here” and he would yell
and he would get so mad at me.
And I'm like, he's too smart.
Or if I'm trying to sneak something
food wise, I'll like, start eating it.
And he's like, “What are you eating?”
And I'm like, ah, chocolate something. Ah.
So I definitely think he's got
superpowers for sure.
Francis: When I became fully blind, my nose
and that touch, they got more sensitive.
If they're eating Japanese food
and I'm eating Italian food and I'm like,
Oh, we're all eating the same thing.
I'm like, “wait, why do I smell fish?
Are you guys eating something
different than I'm eating?”
So yeah, I can definitely use
those senses.
Grace: Looking back, when I was a kid,
I definitely one, I took advantage.
And secondly, I really didn't understand
fully what his situation was
and how frustrating life really is.
And I think now as an adult
and I see like all the different things
that I could have done differently
to make your life easier,
I look back and I wish that I did it,
but now moving forward,
I can do it and I'm going
to continue to learn.
But you are a wonderful man
and very inspirational.
And there's many, many, many, many people
that look to you as an inspiration.
So thank you.
Francis: I'm laughing.
But you know what?
In some way, I understand
that she's understanding more and now
I'm going to keep an eye on her like a hawk
and I'm going to make sure she does it.
But I love her always.
[music ends]